Migrate plugin-site page from wiki (#2579)
jenkins-infra/jenkins.io: content/doc/developer/publishing/plugin-site.adoc

---
title: Plugin Site
layout: developersection
---

This page explains how https://plugins.jenkins.io/[the plugins site]

> works. The intended audience is plugin developers.

Reviewer: Please use sentence-per-line formatting like most of the rest of the developer documentation.

This is not a manual on how to _use_ the site to e.g. find plugins, but
rather explains how it gets its data and how plugin developers can
change the data on it.

== Data shown on the plugins site

=== Which plugins are listed? How can I make my plugin appear?

All plugins published to the current (weekly) update center are listed.

=== What is the plugin installation trend based on?

This uses the monthly data from http://stats.jenkins.io/ as gathered
from Jenkins instances that have not opted out of reporting data.

> Learn more: link:../usage-statistics[usage statistics]

Reviewer: Nit: I don't think this phrasing/lack of punctuation looks good when it's not a URL.

=== What does "most installed" mean?

This ranks plugins by the number of different Jenkins instances that
reported the plugin installed during the previous month.

=== What does 'Recently updated' mean?

This is based on metadata created by the update site generator, which
uses the creation date of a plugin release.

Note that very recent plugin releases may not appear here due to caching
and delays in data aggregation.

=== What does 'Trending' mean?

This is an attempt to capture the plugins whose popularity is growing
rapidly. As we only have the monthly installation stats for this, it's
necessarily a worse approximation than what you'd likely see e.g. in app
stores.

> Currently (2016-11) this just divides the previous month's install count

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Currently (2019-10) this just divides the previous month's install count
```

by the month before that. Plugins with the greatest numbers are shown in
descending order.

=== What are categories based on?

Categories are based on the labels on plugin wiki pages. Those with the
`+plugin-+` prefix are passed through update site generation and will
appear in update-center.json (which gets downloaded by Jenkins, where

> these labels also serve to group plugins in the Plugin Manager).

Reviewer: This hasn't been true in years, so this looks like a nice opportunity to correct this.

Categories are currently based on https://github.com/jenkins-infra/update-center2/#categorizing-plugins

The categories are filtered, grouped, and given nicer names based on
plugin site configuration here:
https://github.com/jenkins-infra/plugin-site-api/blob/master/src/main/resources/categories.json

Some categories that we expect wouldn't mean a lot to users who aren't
plugin developers themselves have been filtered out ("plugin
wrappers"?).

=== Where does the description of the plugin come from?

The plugin site will pull from either the plugin's README page on GitHub or it's wiki page.

==== GitHub
See link:../documentation/#using-github-as-a-source-of-documentation[documentation] for 

> how to configure GitHub documentation.

Reviewer: As a general recommendation, it would be nicer to review PRs like this one if you separate the raw import (+ potential formatting adjustments as needed) and content corrections in the PR into different commits.

==== Wiki
The plugins site scrapes the plugin's wiki page, transforms it a bit
(e.g. makes table of content links not link to wiki.jenkins-ci.org, but
to the plugin site), and caches it.

Changes to plugin wiki pages will therefore take effect with some delay
on the plugin site.

=== What is the maintainer information based on?

These are taken from the plugin's latest released version's metadata,
and additionally (if not redundant) includes the user who released that
version.

=== What's the data source for Version, Dependencies and Display Name?

These are all taken from the plugin's latest released version's pom.xml
metadata.

Implicit dependencies (plugins split from core) are currently not

> included.

Reviewer: Hasn't been true in a long time.

uses the creation date of a plugin release.

Note that very recent plugin releases may not appear here due to caching
and delays in data aggregation.

=== What does 'Trending' mean?

This is an attempt to capture the plugins whose popularity is growing
rapidly. As we only have the monthly installation stats for this, it's
necessarily a worse approximation than what you'd likely see e.g. in app
stores.

Currently (2019-10) this just divides the previous month's install count
by the month before that. Plugins with the greatest numbers are shown in
descending order.

=== What are categories based on?

Categories are based on link:https://github.com/jenkins-infra/update-center2/blob/master/src/main/resources/label-definitions.properties[label-definitions.properties]
 in the link:https://github.com/jenkins-infra/update-center2/#categorizing-plugins[update-center2] GitHub repository.

=== Where does the description of the plugin come from?

The plugin site will pull from either the plugin's README page on GitHub or it's wiki page.

==== GitHub
See link:../documentation/#using-github-as-a-source-of-documentation[documentation] for 
how to configure GitHub documentation.

> ==== Wiki

Reviewer 2: Link https://github.com/jenkins-infra/jenkins.io/blob/master/content/doc/developer/publishing/wiki-page.adoc ?

The plugins site scrapes the plugin's wiki page, transforms it a bit
(e.g. makes table of content links not link to wiki.jenkins-ci.org, but
to the plugin site), and caches it.

Changes to plugin wiki pages will therefore take effect with some delay
on the plugin site.

=== What is the maintainer information based on?

These are taken from the plugin's latest released version's metadata,
and additionally (if not redundant) includes the user who released that
version.

=== What's the data source for Version, Dependencies and Display Name?

These are all taken from the plugin's latest released version's pom.xml
metadata.

Implicit dependencies (plugins split from core) are included with `(Implied)` after the plugin name.

== Data collection and caching

=== Wiki page data

The plugin site caches wiki pages as needed. The cached copy of each
wiki page is marked invalid after several (2019-10: six) hours.

> 

Reviewer: I wonder what the duration is for GitHub.

Author: It seems to be the same: https://github.com/zbynek/plugin-site-api/blob/master/src/main/java/io/jenkins/plugins/services/impl/HttpClientWikiService.java#L56

but I didn't think it actually updated, i.e. I thought it was just at release time? Haven't read the code enough to see how it fully works though

necessarily a worse approximation than what you'd likely see e.g. in app
stores.

Currently (2019-10) this just divides the previous month's install count
by the month before that. Plugins with the greatest numbers are shown in
descending order.

=== What are categories based on?

Categories are based on link:https://github.com/jenkins-infra/update-center2/blob/master/src/main/resources/label-definitions.properties[label-definitions.properties]

>  in the link:https://github.com/jenkins-infra/update-center2/#categorizing-plugins[update-center2] GitHub repository.

Reviewer: Perhaps a link to https://jenkins.io/doc/developer/publishing/requesting-hosting/#categorize-the-plugin too?

These are all taken from the plugin's latest released version's pom.xml
metadata.

> Implicit dependencies (plugins split from core) are included with `(Implied)` after the plugin name.

Reviewer: Nit: Would not use code formatting here.
